[Applause]
[Music]
good evening for the Municipal
Auditorium in Kansas City I am Dorothy
ridings the president of the League of
Women Voters the sponsor of this final
presidential debate of the 1984 campaign
between Republican Ronald Reagan and
Democrat Walter Mondale our panelists
for tonight's debate on defense and
foreign policy issues are Georgie and
Geyer syndicated columnist for universal
press syndicate
Marvin Cao chief diplomatic
correspondent for NBC News Morten
kondraki executive editor of The New
Republic magazine and Henry Truitt
diplomatic correspondent for the
Baltimore Sun Edwin Newman formerly of
NBC News and now a syndicated columnist
for King Features is our moderator Edie
Dorothea writings thank you a brief word
about our procedure tonight the first
question will go to mr. Mondale he'll
have two and a half minutes to reply
then the panel member who put the
question will ask a follow-up the answer
to that will be limited to one minute
after that the same question will be put
to President Reagan again there will be
a follow-up and then each man will have
one minute for rebuttal
the second question will go to President
Reagan first after that the alternating
will continue at the end there will be
four minute summations with President
Reagan going last we have asked the
questioners to be brief
let's begin the sky er your question to
mr. Mondale mr. Mondale two related
questions on the crucial issue of
Central America you and the Democratic
Party have said that the only policy
toward the horrendous civil wars in
Central America should be on the
economic development and negotiations
with perhaps a quarantine of Marxist
Nicaragua do you believe that these
answers would in any way solve the
bitter conflicts there do you really
believe that there is no need to resort
to force at
are not these solutions to Central
Americans knowing problems simply again
too weak and too late I believe that the
question oversimplifies the difficulties
of what we must do in Central America
our objectives ought to be to strengthen
the democracies to stop Communists and
other extremist influences and stabilize
the community and that in that area to
do that we need a three-pronged attack
one is military assistance to our
friends who are being pressured secondly
a strong and sophisticated economic aid
program and human rights program that
offers a better life and a sharper
alternative to the alternative offered
by the totalitarians who opposed us and
finally a strong diplomatic effort that
pursues the possibilities of peace in
the area that's one of the big
disagreements that we have with the
president that they have not pursued the
diplomatic opportunities either with in
El Salvador or as between the countries
and have lost time during which we might
have been able to achieve a peace this
brings up the whole question of what
presidential leadership is all about I
think the lesson in Central America
this recent embarrassment in Nicaragua
where we are giving instructions for
hired assassins hiring criminals and the
rest all of this has strengthened our
opponents a president must not only
assure that we're tough but we must also
be wise and smart in the exercise of
that power we saw the same thing in
Lebanon where we spent a good deal of
America's assets but because the
leadership of this government did not
pursue wise policies we have been
humiliated and our opponents are
stronger the bottom line of national
strength is that the president must be
in command he must lead when a president
doesn't know that
submarine missiles are recallable says
that 70% of our strategic forces are
conventional discovers three years into
his administration that our arms control
efforts have failed because he didn't
know that most Soviet missiles were on
land these are things a president must
know to command a president is called
the commander-in-chief and he's called
that because he's supposed to be in
charge of the facts and run our
government and strengthen our nation mr.
Mondale if I could broaden the question
just a little bit since World War two
every conflict that we as Americans have
been involved with has been in non
conventional or irregular terms and yet
we keep fighting in conventional or
traditional term military terms the
Central American wars are very much in
the same pattern as China as Lebanon as
Iran as Cuba in the early days do you
see any possibility that we are going to
realize the change in warfare in our
time or react to it in those terms we
absolutely must which is why I responded
to your first question the way I did
it's much much more complex
you must understand the region you must
understand the politics the area you
must provide a strong alternative and
you must show strength and all at the
same time that's why I object to the
covert action in Nicaragua that's a
classic example of a strategy that's
embarrassed us strengthen our opposition
and it undermined the moral authority of
our people and our country in the region
strength requires knowledge command
we've seen in the Nicaraguan example a
policy that has actually hurt us
strengthen our opposition and undermine
the moral authority of our country in
that region mr. president in the last
few months that has seemed more and more
that your policies in Central America
were beginning to work it just at this
moment we are confronted with the
extraordinary story of a CIA guerrilla
manual for the anti sandanista Contras
whom we are backing which advocates now
assassinations of Sandinistas but the
hiring of criminals to assassinate the
grille as we are supporting in order to
create martyrs is this not in effect our
own state supported terrorism know what
I'm glad you asked that question because
I know it's on many people's minds I
have ordered an investigation I know
that the CIA is already going forward
with one we have a gentleman down in
Nicaragua who is on contract to the CIA
advising supposedly on military tactics
the Contras and he drew up this manual
it was turned over to the agency head in
of the CIA in Nicaragua for to be
printed and a number of pages were
excised by that agency head there the
man in charge and he sent it on up here
to CIA where more pages were excised
before it was printed but some way or
other there were 12 of the original
copies that got out down there and were
not submitted for this printing process
by the CIA now those the details as we
have them and as soon as we have an
investigation and find out where any
blame lies for the few that did not get
excised or changed we certainly are
going to do something about that we'll
take the proper action at the proper
time I was very interested to hear about
Central America and our process down
there and I thought for a moment that
instead of a debate I was going to find
a mr. Mondale and complete agreement
with what we're doing because the plan
that he has outlined is the one we've
been following for quite some time
including diplomatic processes
throughout Central America and working
closely with the Contador group so I can
only tell you about the the manual that
we're not in the habit of assigning
guilt before there has been proper
evidence produced and proof of that
guilt but if guilt is established
whoever is guilty we will treat with
that situation then
and they will be removed mr. president
you are implying then that the CIA in
Nicaragua is directing the Contras there
I'd also like to ask whether having the
CIA investigate its own manual in such a
sensitive area is not sort of like
sending the the Fox into the chicken
coop a second time I'm afraid I misspoke
when I said a CIA head in Nicaragua
there's not someone there directing all
of this activity there are as you know
CIA men a men stationed in other
countries in the world and certainly in
Central America and so it was a man down
there in that area that this was
delivered to and he recognized that what
was in that manual was direct
contravention of my own executive order
in December of 1981 that we would have
nothing to do with regard to political
assassinations mr. Mondale your rebuttal
what is the president charged with doing
when he takes his oath of office he
raises his right hand
it takes an oath an oath of office to
take care to faithfully execute the laws
of the land president can't know
everything but a president has to know
those things that are essential to his
leadership and the enforcement of our
laws
this manual several thousands of which
were produced was distributed ordering
political assassinations hiring of
criminals and other forms of terrorism
some of it was excised but the part
dealing with political terrorism was
continued how can this happen how can
something this serious occur in an
administration and have a president the
United States in a situation like this
say he didn't know a president must know
these things I don't know which is worse
not knowing or knowing and not stopping
it
and what about the mining of the harbors
in Nicaragua which violated
international law this has hurt this
country and a president's supposed to
command mr. president your rebuttal yes
I have so many things there to respond
to I'm going to pick out something you
said earlier you've been all over the
country repeating something that I will
admit the press has also been repeating
that I believed that nuclear missiles
could be fired and then called back I
never ever conceived of such a thing I
never said any such thing in a
discussion of our strategic arms
negotiations I said that submarines
carrying missiles and airplanes carrying
missiles were more conventional type
weapons not as destabilizing as the
land-based missiles and that they were
also weapons that or carriers that if
they were sent out and there was a
change you could call them back before
they had launched their missiles but I
hope that from here on you will no
longer be saying that particular thing
which is absolutely false how anyone
could think that any sane person would
believe you could call back a nuclear
missile I think is as ridiculous as that
as the whole concept has been so thank
you for giving me a chance to straighten
the record I'm sure that you appreciate
that mr. Cal mr. Berg mr. Kalba question
to President Reagan mr. president you
have often described the Soviet Union as
a powerful evil empire intent on world
domination but this year you have said
and I quote if they want to keep their a
Mickey Mouse system that's okay with me
which is it mr. president do you want to
contain them within their present
borders and perhaps try to reestablish
they taunt or what goes for date on what
do you really want to roll back their
empire I have said and a number of
occasions exactly what I believe about
the Soviet Union
I retract nothing that I have said I
believe that many of the things they
have done are evil in any concept of
morality that we have but I also
recognize that as the two great
superpowers in the world we have to live
with each other and I told mr. Gromyko
we don't like their system they don't
like ours and we're not going to change
their system and they sure better not
try to change ours but between us we can
either destroy the world or we can save
it and I suggested that certainly it was
to their common interest
along with ours to avoid a conflict and
to attempt to save the world and remove
the nuclear weapons and I think that
perhaps we established a little better
understanding I think that in dealing
with the Soviet Union one has to be
realistic I know that mr. Mondale in the
past has made statements as if they were
just people like ourselves and if we
were kind and good and did something
nice they would respond accordingly and
the result was unilateral disarmament we
cancelled the b1 under the previous
administration what did we get for it
nothing the Soviet Union has been
engaged in the biggest military buildup
in the history of man at the same time
that we tried the policy of unilateral
disarmament of weakness if you will and
now we are putting up a defense of our
own and I've made it very plain to them
we seek no superiority we simply are
going to provide a deterrent so there
will be too costly for them if they are
nursing any ideas of aggression against
us now they claim they're not and I made
it plain to them we're not but this
there's been no change in my attitude at
all I just thought when I came into
office it was time that there was some
realistic talk to and about the Soviet
Union and we did get their attention mr.
president perhaps the other side of the
corner related question sir since World
War two the vital interests of the
United States have always been defined
by treaty commitments and by
presidential proclamations aside from
what is obvious such as NATO for example
which countries which regions in the
world do you regard as vital national
interests of this country meaning that
you would send American troops to fight
there if they were in danger well now
you've added a hypothetical there at the
end to care about that where we would
send troops into fight I am NOT going to
make the decision as to what the tactics
could be but obviously there are a
number of areas in the world that are of
importance to us one is the Middle East
and that is of interest to the
Western world and the industrialized
nations because of the great supply of
energy on which so many depend there the
our neighbors here in America
are vital to us we're working right now
and trying to be of help in southern
Africa with regard to the independence
of Namibia and the removal of the Cuban
surrogates the thousands of them from
Angola so I can say there are a great
many interest I believe that we have a
great interest in the Pacific Basin that
is where I think the future of the world
lies but I am NOT going to pick out one
and in advance hypothetically say oh yes
we would send troops there sorry of time
was up mr. Mondale you have described
the Soviet leaders as a nun quoting
cynical ruthless and dangerous
suggesting an almost total lack of trust
in them in that case what makes you
think that the annual summit meetings
with them that you've proposed will
result in agreements that would satisfy
the interests of this country because
the only type of agreements to reach for
the Soviet Union are the types that are
specifically defined so we know exactly
what they must do
subject to full verification which means
we know every day whether they're living
up to it and follow-ups wherever we find
suggestions that they're violating it
and the strongest possible terms I have
no illusions about the Soviet Union
leadership or the nature of that state
they are a tough and a ruthless
adversary and we must be prepared to
meet that challenge and I would wear I
part with the president is that despite
all of those differences we must as past
presidents before this one have done
meet on the common ground of survival
and that's where the president has
opposed practically every arms control
agreement by every president of both
political parties since the bomb went
off and he now completes this term with
no progress toward arms control at all
but with a very dangerous arms race
underway in
there are now over 2,000 more warheads
pointed at us today than there were when
he was sworn in and that does not
striction us we must be very very
realistic in the nature of that
leadership but we must grind away and
talk to find ways to reducing these
differences particularly where arms
races are concerned and other dangerous
exercises of Soviet power
there will be no unilateral disarmament
under my administration I will keep this
nation strong I understand exactly what
the Soviets are are up to but that too
is a part of national strength to do
that a president must know what is
essential to command and to leadership
and de strength and that's where the
president's failure to master in my
opinion the essential elements of arms
control has cost us dearly these four
years three years into this
administration he said he just
discovered that most Soviet missiles are
on land and that's why his proposal
didn't work I invite the American people
tomorrow because I will issue the
statement quoting President Reagan he
said exactly what I said he said he said
that these missiles were less dangerous
than ballistic missiles because you
could fire them and you could recall
them if you decided there had been a
miscalculation I'm sorry I must know
those things related question mr.
Mondale on Eastern Europe do you accept
the conventional diplomatic wisdom that
Eastern Europe is a Soviet sphere of
influence and if you do what could a
Mondale administration realistically do
to help the people of Eastern Europe
achieve the human rights that were
guaranteed to them as a result of the
health sinky Accords I think the
essential strategy of the United States
ought not accept any Soviet control over
Eastern Europe we ought to deal with
each of these countries separately we
ought to pursue strategies with each of
them economic and the rest that help
them pull away from their dependence
upon the Soviet Union where the Soviet
Union has acted irresponsibly as they
have in many of those countries as
especially recently in Poland I believe
we ought to insist that Western credits
extended to the Soviet Union bear the
market rate make the Soviets pay for
their irresponsibility that is a very
important objective to make certain that
we continue to look forward to continent
to progress toward greater independence
by these nations and work with each of
them separately mr. president your
rebuttal yes I'm not going to continue
trying to respond to these repetitions
of the falsehoods that have already been
stated here but with regard to whether
mr. Mondale would be strong as he said
he would be I know that he has a
commercial out where he is appearing on
the deck of the Nimitz and watching the
f-14s takeoff and that's an image of
strength except that if he had had his
way when the Nimitz was being planned he
would have been deep in the water out
there because there wouldn't have been
any Nimitz to stand on he was against it
he was against the f-14 fighter he was
against the m1 tank he was against the
b-1 bomber he wanted to cut the salary
of the all of the military he wanted to
bring home half of the American forces
in Europe and he has a record of
weakness with regard to our national
defense that is second to none indeed he
was on that side virtually throughout
all his years in the Senate and the
opposed even President Carter went
toward the end of his term President
Carter wanted to increase the defense
budget mr. Mondale your rebuttal mr.
president I accept your commitment to
peace but I want you to accept my
commitment to a strong national defense
I propose a budget I have proposed a
budget which would increase our nation's
strength by by in real terms by doubled
that of Soviet Union I'll tell you where
we disagree it is true over ten years
ago
I voted delay production of f-14 I'll
tell you why the plane wasn't flying
supposed to be the way it was supposed
to be it was a waste of money your
definition of national strength is to
throw money at the Defense Department my
make certain that a dollar spent buys us
a dollar
worth of defense there's a big
difference between the two of us a
president must manage that budget I will
keep a strong but you'll not do that
unless you command that budget and make
certain we get the strength that we need
and you pay $500 Rifai dollar hammer
you're not buying strength I would ask
the audience not to applaud all it does
is take up time that we would like to
devote to the debate mr. kondraki our
question to mr. Mondale mr. Mondale in
an address earlier this year you said
that before this country resorts to
military force and I'm quoting American
interest should be sharply defined
publicly supported congressionally
sanctioned militarily feasible
internationally defensible open to
independence scrutiny and alert to
regional history now aren't you setting
up such a gauntlet of tests here that
adversaries could easily suspect that as
president you would never use force to
protect American interests
no matter of fact I believe every one of
those standards is essential to the
exercise of power by this country and we
can see that in both Lebanon and in
Central America in Lebanon this
president exercised American power all
right but the management of it was such
that our Marines were killed we had to
leave in humiliation the Soviet Union
became stronger terrorists became
emboldened and it was because they did
not think through how power should be
exercised did not have the American
public with him on a plan that worked
that we ended up the way we did
similarly in Central America what we're
doing in Nicaragua with this covert war
which the Congress including many
Republicans have tried to stop is
finally end up with the public
definition of merit of American power
that hurts us where we get associated
with political assassins and the rest we
have to decline for the first time in
modern history jurisdiction of the World
Court because they'll find us guilty of
illegal actions and our enemies are
strengthened from all of this we need to
be strong we need to be prepared to use
that strength but we must understand
that we are a democracy
we are a government by the people and
when we move it should be for very
severe and extreme reasons that serve
our national interest and end up with a
stronger country behind us it is only in
that way that we can persevere you've
been quoted as saying that you might
quarantine Nicaragua I'd like to know
what that means
would you stop Soviet ships as President
Kennedy did in 1962 and wouldn't that be
more dangerous than President Reagan's
covert war what I'm referring to there
is the mutual self-defense provisions
that exist in the inter-american treaty
so-called real pact that permits the
nations our friends in that region to
combine to take steps diplomatic and
otherwise to prevent Nicaragua when she
acts irresponsibly in asserting power in
other parts outside of her border to
take those steps whatever they might be
to stop it the Nicaraguans must know
that it is the policy of our government
that those people that that leadership
must stay behind the boundaries of their
nation not interfere in other nations
and by working with all of the nations
in the region unlike the policies of
this administration and unlike the
president said they have not supported
negotiations in that region we will be
much stronger because we'll have the
moral authority that goes with those
efforts President Reagan you introduced
US forces into Lebanon as neutral
peacekeepers but then you made them
combatants on the side of the Lebanese
government eventually you were forced to
withdraw them under fire and now Syria a
Soviet Ally is dominant in the country
doesn't Lebanon represent a major
failure on the part of your
administration and raise serious
questions about your capacity as a
foreign policy strategist and is
commander-in-chief know important I
don't agree to all of those things first
of all when we and our allies the
Italians the French in the United
Kingdom went into Lebanon we went in
there at the request of what was left of
the Lebanese government
to be a stabilizing force while they
tried to establish a government but the
first pardon me the first time we went
in we went in at their request because
the war was going on right in Beirut
between Israel and the PLO terrorist
Israel could not be blamed for that
those terrorists had been violating
their northern border consistently and
Israel chased them all the way to there
then we went in with a multinational
force to help remove and did remove more
than 13,000 of those terrorists from
Lebanon we departed and then the
government of Lebanon asked us back in
as a stabilizing force while they
established a government and sought to
get the foreign forces all the way out
of Lebanon and that they could then take
care of their own borders and we were
succeeding we were there for the better
part of a year our position happened to
be at the airport or there were
occasional sniping and sometimes some
artillery fire but we did not engage in
conflict that was out of line with our
mission I will never send troops
anywhere on a mission of that kind
without telling them that if somebody
shoots at them they can darn well shoot
back and this is what we did we never
initiated any kind of action we defended
ourselves there but we were succeeding
to the point that the Lebanese
government had been organized if you
remember there were the meetings in
Geneva in which they began to meet with
the hostile factional forces and try to
put together some kind of a peace plan
we were succeeding and that was why the
terrorist acts began there are forces
there and that includes Syria in my mind
who don't want us to succeed who don't
want that kind of a peace with a
dominant eleven dominant over its own
territory and so the terrorist acts
began and led to the one great tragedy
when they were killed in that suicide
bombing the building then the unilateral
lateral force withdrew for only one
reason
we withdrew because we were no longer
able to carry out the mission for which
we had been sent in but we went in in
the interest of peace and to keep Israel
and Syria from getting into the sixth
war between them and I have no apologies
for our going on a peace mission mr.
president four years ago you criticize
President Carter for ignoring ample
warnings that our diplomats in Iran
might be taken hostage haven't you done
exactly the same thing in Lebanon not
once but three times with 300 Americans
not hostages but dead and you vowed
Swift retaliation against terrorists but
doesn't our lack of response suggest
that you're just bluffing
Morton no I think there's a great
difference between the government of
Iran threatening our diplomatic
personnel and there is a government that
you can see and can put your hand on in
the terrorists situation there are
terrorist factions all over in that in a
recent 30 day period 37 terrorist acts
in 20 countries have been committed the
most recent has been the one in Brighton
in dealing with terrorists yes we want
to retaliate but only if we can put our
finger on the people responsible and not
endanger the lives of innocent civilians
there in the various communities and in
the city of Beirut where these
terrorists are operating I have just
signed legislation to add to our ability
to deal along with our allies with this
terrorist problem and it's going to take
all the nations together justice when we
banded together we pretty much resolved
the whole problem of high jet Sky
jackings some time ago well the red
light went on I could have gone on
forever mr. Mondale your rebuttal
Groucho Marx said who do you believe me
or your own eyes and what we have in
Lebanon is something that the American
people have seen the Joint Chiefs urged
the president not to put our troops in
that barracks because they were
undefensible they urged they went to him
five days before they were killed and
said please take them out of there
Secretary of State admitted that this
morning he did not do so report
following the explosion the barracks
disclosed that we had not taken any of
the steps that we should have taken that
was the second time
then the embassy was blowing up a few
weeks ago and once again none of the
steps that should have been taken were
taken and we were warned five days
before that explosives were on their way
and they weren't taken the terrorists
have won each time the president told
the terrorists he was going to retaliate
he didn't they called their bluff and
the bottom line is the United States
left in humiliation and our enemies are
stronger mr. president your rebuttal yes
first of all mr. Mondale should know
that the President of the United States
did not order the Marines into that
barracks that was a command decision
made by the commanders on the spot and
based with what they thought was best
for the men there that is one and the
other things that you've just said about
the terrorists I'm tempted to ask you
what you would do these are unidentified
people and after the bomb goes off
they're blown to bits because they are
suicidal individuals who think that
they're going to go to paradise if they
perpetrate such an act and lose their
life in doing it we are going to as I
say we're busy trying to find the
centers where these operations stem from
and retaliation will be taken but we are
not going to simply kill some people to
say oh look we got even we want to know
when we retaliate that we're retaliating
with those who are responsible but the
terrorist acts and terrorist acts are
such that our own United States Capitol
in Washington has been bombed twice mr.
Truitt your question to President Reagan
mr. president I want to raise an issue
that I think has been lurking out there
for two or three weeks in castex
specifically in national security terms
you already are the oldest president in
history and some of your staff say you
were tired after your most recent
encounter with mr. mr. Mondale I recall
yet that President Kennedy will had to
go for days on end with very little
sleep during the Cuban Missile Crisis is
there any doubt in your mind that you
would be able to function in such
circumstances
not at all mr. Truitt and I and I want
you to know that also I will not make
age an issue of this campaign I am NOT
going to exploit for political purposes
my opponents youth and inexperience
[Applause]
if I still have time I might add mr.
Truitt I might add that it was Seneca or
I was Cicero I don't know wish that said
if it was not for the elders correcting
the mistakes of the young there would be
no state head for the fence and try to
catch that one before it goes over but
but I'll go on to another question the
you and mr. Mondale have already
disagreed about what you had to say
about recalling submarine launch
missiles there's another a similar issue
out there that relates to your it is
said at least that you were unaware that
the Soviet retaliatory power was based
on land-based missiles first is that
correct secondly if it is correct have
you informed yourself in the meantime in
third is it even necessary for the
president to be so intimately involved
in strategic details yes this had to do
with our disarmament talks and the whole
controversy about land missiles came up
because we thought that the strategic
nuclear weapons the most destabilizing
of the land-based you put your thumb at
a button and somebody blows up in 20
minutes later so we thought that it
would be simpler to negotiate first with
those and then we made it plain a second
phase take up the submarine launched the
earth the airborne missiles the Soviet
Union to our surprise and not just mine
made it plain when we brought this up
that they placed they thought a greater
reliance than the land-based missiles
and therefore they wanted to take up all
three and we agreed we said all right if
that's what you want to do but it was a
surprise to us because they outnumbered
us 64 to 36 in submarines and 20% more
bombers capable of carrying nuclear
missiles than we had so why should we
believe that they had placed that much
more reliance on land-based
but even after we gave in and said all
right let's discuss at all they walked
away from the table we didn't mr.
Mondale I'm gonna hang in there should
the president's age and stamina be an
issue in the political campaign no and I
have not made it an issue or should it
be what's at issue here is the
president's application of his authority
to understand what a president must know
to lead this nation secure our defense
and make the decisions and the judgments
that are necessary and a minute ago the
president quoted Cicero I believe I want
to quote somebody a little closer home
Harry Truman he said the buck stops here
we just heard the president's answer for
the problems at the barracks in Lebanon
where 241 Marines were killed what
happened first the Joint Chiefs of Staff
went to the president said don't put
those troops there they did it and then
5 days before the troops were killed
they went back to the president through
the Secretary of Defense and said please
mr. president take those troops out of
there because we can't defend them they
didn't do it and we know what's rare
what happened after that
once again our embassy was exploded this
is the fourth time this has happened
an identical attack in the same region
despite warnings even public warnings
from the terrorists who's in charge
who's handling this matter that's my
main point now on arms control we're
completing four years this is the first
administration since the bomb went off
that made no progress we have an arms
race underway instead a president has to
lead his government or it won't be done
different people with different views
fight with each other for three and a
half years this administration avoided
arms control resisted tabling arms
control proposals that had any hope of
agreeing rebuked their negotiator in
1981 when he came close to an agreement
at least in principle on medium-range
weapons and we have this arms race
underway and a recent book that just
came out but it perhaps the nation's
most respected author in this field
stroked out but called deadly gambit
concludes that this president has failed
to master the essential details needed
to command and lead us both in terms of
security in terms of arms control that's
why they called the president a
commander-in-chief good intentions I
grant but it takes more than that
you must be tough and smart this
question of leadership keeps arising in
different forms in this discussion
already and the president mr. Mondale
has called you whining and vacillating
among the more charitable phrases week I
believe is it is a question of
leadership and he has made the point
that you have not repudiated some of the
semi diplomatic activity of the Reverend
Jackson particularly in Central America
or do you did you approve of his
diplomatic activity and are you prepared
to repudiate him not I I read his
statement the other day I don't admire
Fidel Castro at all and I have said that
Che Guevara was a contemptible figure in
civilizations history I know the Cuban
state as a police state and all my life
I've worked in a way the demonstrates
that but Jesse Jackson is an independent
person I don't control him and let's
talk about people we do control in the
last debate the vice president the
United States said that I said the
Marines had died shamefully and died in
shame in Lebanon I demanded an apology
from Vice President Bush because I had
him stead honored these young men
grieved for their families and think
they were wonderful Americans that
honored us all what does the president
have to say about taking responsibility
for a vice president who won't apologize
for something like that mr. president
your rebuttal yes I know it'll come as a
surprise to mr. Mondale but I am in
charge and as a matter of fact we
haven't avoided arms control talks with
the Soviet Union very early in my
administration I proposed and I think
something that had never been proposed
by any previous administration I
proposed a total elimination of
intermediate-range missiles where the
Soviets had better than a ton and still
have better than a ten to one advantage
over the allies in Europe when they
protested that and suggested a smaller
number perhaps I went along with that
the so-called negotiation that you said
I
doubt on was the so-called walk in the
wood between one of our representatives
and one of the Soviet Union and it
wasn't me that turned it down the Soviet
Union dish about it mr. Mondale your
rebuttal there are two distinguished
authors and arms control in this country
there are many others but two that I
want to cite tonight one is strobed
helpit in his classic book deadly gambit
the other is John Newhouse who's one of
the most distinguished arms control
specialists in our country both said
that this administration turned down the
walk and the grill woods agreement first
and that would have been a perfect
agreement from the standpoint of the
United States and Europe and our
security when Mr nitsa a good negotiator
returned he was buked and his boss was
fired this is the kind of leadership
that we've had in this administration in
the most deadly issue of our time now we
have a runaway arms race all they've got
to show for four years and us-soviet
relations is one meeting and the last
weeks of an administration and nothing
before they're tough negotiators but all
previous presidents have made progress
this one has not the sky are you a
question to mr. Monday mr. Mondale many
analysts are now saying that actually
our number one foreign policy problem
today is one that remains almost totally
unrecognized massive illegal immigration
from economically collapsing countries
they are saying that it is the only real
territorial threat to the American
nation-state you yourself said in the
1970s that we had a quote hemorrhage on
our borders unquote yet today you have
backed off any immigration reform such
as the balanced and highly crafted
Simpson Mazzoli bill why what would you
do instead today if anything this is a
very serious problem in our country and
it has to be dealt with I object to that
part of the Simpson missoula bill which
I think is very unfair and would prove
to be so that is the part that requires
employers to determine the citizenship
of an employee before they're hired I am
convinced that the result of this would
be that people who are Hispanic people
who have different languages or speak
with an accent would find it difficult
to be employed I think that's wrong
we've never had citizenship tests in our
country before and I don't think we
should have a citizenship card today
that is counterproductive I do support
the other aspects of the Simpson
missoula bill that strengthened
enforcement at the border strengthen
other ways of dealing with undocumented
workers in this in this difficult area
and dealing with the problem of settling
people who have lived here for many many
years and do not have an established
status I have further strongly recommend
that this administration do something
that is not done and that is to
strengthen enforcement at the border
strengthen the officials in this
government that deal with undocumented
workers and to do so in a way that's
responsible and within the Constitution
of the United States we need an answer
to this problem but it must be an
American answer it is consistent with
justice and due process everyone in this
room practically here tonight is an
immigrant
we came here loving this night nation
serving it and it has served all of our
most bountiful dreams and one of those
dreams is justice and that we need a
measure and I will support a measure it
brings about those objectives but avoids
that one aspect that I think is very
serious the second part is to maintain
and improve relations with our friends
to the south we cannot solve this
problem all on our own and that's why
the failure of this administration to
deal in effective in good faith way with
Mexico with Costa Rica with the other
nations in trying to find a peaceful
settlement to the dispute in Central
America has undermined our capacity to
effectively to deal diplomatic in this
diplomatically in this area as well
serve people as well-balanced and just
as father Theodore Hesburgh
notre-dame who headed the Select
Commission on immigration had pointed
out repeatedly that there will be no
immigration reform without employer
sanctions because it would be an
unbalanced bill and there would be
simply no way to reinforce it however
putting that aside for the moment your
critics have also said repeatedly that
you have not gone along with the bill or
with any immigration reform because of
the Hispanic groups or Hispanic
leadership groups who actually do not
represent what the Hispanic Americans
want because polls show that they
overwhelmingly wants some kind of
immigration reform
can you say or how can you justify your
position on this and how do you respond
to the criticism that this is another or
that this is an example of your
flip-flopping and giving in to special
interest groups at the expense of the
American nation I think you're right
that the polls show that the majority of
Hispanics want that bill so I'm not
doing it for political reasons I'm doing
it because all my life I've fought for a
system of justice in this country a
system in which every American has a
chance to achieve the fullness in life
without discrimination this bill imposes
upon employers the responsibility of
determining whether somebody who applies
for a job is an American or not and just
inevitably they're going to be reluctant
to hire Hispanics or people with a
different accent
if I were dealing with politics here the
polls show the American people want this
I am for reform in this area for tough
enforcement at the border and for many
other aspects of the Simpson missoula
bill but all my life I've fought for a
fairer nation and despite the politics
of it I stand where I stand and I think
I'm right and before this fight is over
we're going to come up with a better
bill a more effective bill does not
undermine the liberties of our people
mr. president you to have said that our
borders are out of control
yet this fall you
loud the Simpson Mazzoli bill which
would at least have minimally protected
our borders and the rights of
citizenship because of a relatively
unimportant issue of reimbursement to
the states for legalized aliens given
that and I asked what priority can we
expect you to give this forgotten
national security element how sincere
are you in your efforts to control in
effect the nation state that is the
United States Georgia and we believe me
supported the Simpson Mazzoli bill
strongly and the bill that came out of
the Senate
however there were things added in in
the house side that we felt made it less
of a good bill as a matter of fact made
it a bad bill and in conference we
stayed with them in conference all the
way to where even senator Simpson did
not want the bill in the manner in which
it would come out of the conference
committee there were a number of things
in there that weakened that bill I can't
go into detail about them here but it is
true our borders are out of control it
is also true that this has been a
situation in our borders back through a
number of administrations and I
supported this bill I believe in the
idea of amnesty for those who have put
down roots and who have lived here even
though some time back there they may
have entered illegally with regard to
the employer sanctions this we must have
that not only to ensure that we can
identify the illegal aliens but also
while some keep protesting about what it
would do to employers there as another
employer that we shouldn't be so
concerned about and these are employers
down through the years who have
encouraged the illegal entry into this
country because they then hire these
individuals and hire them a starvation
wages and with none of the benefits that
we think are normal and natural for
workers in our country and the
individuals can't complain because of
their illegal status we don't think that
those people should be allowed to
continue operating free and this was why
the provisions that we had in with
regard to sanctions and so forth
and I'm going to do everything I can and
all of us in the administration are to
join and again when Congress is back at
it to get an immigration bill that will
give us once again control of our
borders and with regard to friendship
below the border and with the countries
down there yes no administration that I
know has established the relationship
that we have with our Latin friends but
as long as they have an economy that
believe so many people in dire poverty
and unemployment they are going to seek
that employment across our borders and
we work with those other countries mr.
president the experts also say that the
situation today is terribly different
quantitatively qualitatively different
from what it has been in the past
because of the gigantic population
growth for instance Mexico's population
will go from about sixty million today
to 120 million at the turn of the
century many of these people will be
coming into the United States not as
citizens but as illegal workers you have
repeatedly said recently that you
believe that Armageddon the destruction
of the world may be imminent in our
times do you ever feel that we are in
for an Armageddon or a situation a time
of anarchy regarding the population
explosion in the world no as a matter of
fact the population explosion if you
look at the actual figures has been
vastly exaggerated over-exaggerated as a
matter of fact there are some pretty
scientific and solid figures about how
much space there still is in the world
and how many more people we can have
it's almost like going back to the
Malthusian theory when even then they
were saying that everyone would starve
with the limited population they had
then but the problem of population
growth is one here with regard to our
immigration and we have been the safety
valve whether we wanted to or not with
the illegal entry here in Mexico where
their population is increasing and they
don't have an economy that can absorb
the
provide the jobs and this is what we're
trying to work out not only to protect
our own borders but they have some kind
of fairness and recognition of that
problem mr. Mondale your rebuttal what
are the biggest problems today is that
the countries to our south are so
desperately poor that these people who
will almost lose their lives if they
don't come north come north despite all
the risks and if we're going to find a
permanent fundamental answer to this it
goes to American economic and trade
policies that permit these nations to
have a chance to get on their own two
feet and to get prosperity so that they
can have jobs for themselves and their
people and that's why this enormous
national debt engineered by this
administration is hiring these countries
and fueling this immigration these high
interest rates real rates that have
doubled under this administration have
had the same effect on Mexico and so on
and the cost repaying those debts is so
enormous that it results in massive
unemployment hardship and heartache and
that drives our friends to the north to
the south up into our region and we need
to end those deficits as well mr.
president your rebuttal when my rebuttal
is I've heard the national debt blamed
for a lot of things but not for illegal
immigration across our border and it has
nothing to do with it but with regard to
these high interest rates to at least
give us the recognition of the fact that
when you left office mr. Mondale they
were 21 and a half the prime rate it's
now twelve and a quarter and I predict
it'll be coming down a little more
shortly so we're trying to undo some of
the things that your administration did
no applause please mr. Carroll your
question to President Reagan mr.
president I'd like to pick up this
Armageddon theme you've been quoted as
saying that you do believe deep down
that we are heading for some kind of
biblical Armageddon your Pentagon and
your Secretary of Defense have plans for
the United States to fight and prevail
in a nuclear war do you feel that we are
now heading perhaps for some kind of
nuclear Armageddon and do you feel that
this country and the world could survive
that kind of calamity mr. Calvin I think
what has been hailed as something I'm
supposedly as president discussing this
principle is the result of just some
philosophical discussions with people
who interested in the same things and
that is the prophecies down through the
years the biblical prophecies of what
would portend the coming of Armageddon
and so forth and the fact that a number
of theologians for the last decade or
more have believed that this was true
that the prophecies are coming together
that portend that but no one knows
whether Armageddon those prophecies mean
that Armageddon is a thousand years away
or day after tomorrow
so I have never seriously warned and
said we must plan according to
Armageddon now with regard to having to
say whether we would try to survive in
the event of a nuclear war of course we
would but let me also point out but to
several Parliament's around the world in
Europe and in Asia I have made a
statement in each to each one of them
and I'll repeat it here a nuclear war
cannot be won and must never be fought
and that is why we are maintaining a
deterrent and trying to achieve a
deterrent capacity to where no one would
believe that they could start such a war
and escape with limited damage but the
deterrent and that's what it is for is
also what led me to propose what is now
being called the Star Wars
concept but propose that we research to
see if there isn't a defensive weapon
that could defend against incoming
missiles and if such a defense could be
found
wouldn't it be far more humanitarian to
say that now we can defend against a
nuclear war by destroying missiles
instead of slaughtering millions of
people mr. president when you made that
proposal the so-called Star Wars
proposal you said if I'm not mistaken
that you would share this very super
sophisticated technology with the Soviet
Union after all of the distrust over the
years sir that you have expressed
towards the Soviet Union do you really
expect anyone to take seriously that
offer that you would share the best of
America's technology in this weapons
area with our principal adversary why
not what if we did and I hope we can
we're still researching what if we come
up with a weapon that renders those
missiles obsolete there has never been a
weapon invented in the history of man
that has not led to a defensive a
counter weapon but suppose we came up
with that now some people have said ah
that would make it war imminent because
they would think that we could know if
launch a first strike because we could
defend against the enemy but why not
do what I have offered to do and ask the
Soviet Union to do say look here's what
we can do we'll even give it to you
now will you sit down with us and once
and for all get rid all of us of these
nuclear weapons and free mankind from
that threat I think that would be the
greatest use of a defensive weapon is
mondo you've been very sharply critical
of the president's Strategic Defense
Initiative and yet what is wrong with a
major effort by this country to try to
use its best technology to knock out as
many incoming nuclear warheads as
possible first of all let me sharply
disagree with the President on sharing
the most advanced the most dangerous the
most important technology in America
with the Soviet
Union we have had for many years
understandably a system of restraints
and high technology because the Soviets
are behind us and any research or
development along the Star Wars schemes
would inevitably involve our most
advanced computers most advanced
engineering and the thought that we
would share this with the Soviet Union
is in my opinion a total non-starter I
would not let the Soviet Union get their
hands on it at all now what's wrong with
Star Wars there's nothing wrong with the
theory of it if we could develop a
principle that would say both sides
could fire all their missiles and no one
would get hurt I suppose it's a good
idea but the fact of it is we're so far
away from research that even comes close
to that that this director of
engineering research in the Defense
Department said to get there we would
have to solve eight problems each of
which are more difficult than the atomic
bomb and the Manhattan Project it would
cost something like a trillion dollars
to test and deploy weapons the second
thing is this all assumes that the
Soviets wouldn't respond in kind and
they always do we don't get behind they
won't get behind and that's been the
tragic story of the arms race we have
more at stake in space satellites than
they do if we could stop right now the
testing and the deployment of these
space weapons and the president's
proposals go clear beyond research if it
was just research we wouldn't have any
argument because maybe someday somebody
will think of something but to commit
this nation to a buildup of an T
satellite and space weapons at this time
in their crude state would bring about
an arms race that's very dangerous
indeed one final point the most
dangerous aspect of this proposal is for
the first time we would delegate to
computers the decision as to whether to
start a war that's dead wrong there
wouldn't be time for a president to
decide it would be decided by these
remote commuter computers might be an
oil fire it might be a jet
the computer might decide it's a missile
and off we go
why don't we stop this madness now and
draw a line and keep the heavens free
for more mr. Mondale in this in this
general area served arms control
President Carter's national security
advisors Brig net Brzezinski said quote
a nuclear freeze is a hoax
unquote yet the basis of your arms
proposals as I understand them is a
mutual and verifiable freeze on existing
weapon systems in your view which
specific weapons systems could be
subject to a mutual and verifiable
freeze and which could not every system
that is verifiable should be placed on
the table for negotiations or an
agreement I would not agree to any
negotiations or any agreement that
involved conduct on the part of the
Soviet Union that we couldn't verify
every day I would not agree to any
agreement in which the United States
security interest was not fully
recognized and supported that's that's
why we say mutual and verifiable freezes
now what why do I support the freeze
because this ever-rising
arms race madness makes both nation less
secure it's more difficult to defend
this nation it is putting a hair-trigger
on nuclear war this administration by
going into the Star Wars system is going
to add a dangerous new escalations we
have to be tough on the Soviet Union but
I think the American people the Soviet
women want it to stop President Reagan
your rebuttal yes my rebuttal once again
is that this invention that has just
been created here of how I would go
about rolling over for the Soviet Union
no mr. Mondale my idea would be with
that defensive weapon that we would sit
down with them and then
say now are you willing to join us
here's what we can give them in that
give them a demonstration and then say
here's what we can do now if you're
willing to join us in getting rid of all
the nuclear weapons in the world then
we'll give you this one so that we would
both know that no one can cheat that
we've both got something that if anyone
tries to cheat but when you could keep
star warring it I never suggested where
the weapon should be or what kind I'm
not a scientist I said in the Joint
Chiefs of Staff agreed with me that it
was time for us to turn our research
ability to seeing if we could not find
this kind of a defensive weapon and
suddenly somebody says oh it's got to be
up there and his Star Wars and so forth
I don't know what it would be but if we
can come up with one I think the world
will be better off mr. Mondale your
rebuttal well that's what a president's
supposed to know where those weapons are
going to be if there are space weapons I
assume they'll be in space if there any
satellite weapons I assume they're going
to be made aren't against any satellites
now this is the most dangerous
technology that we possess the Soviets
try to spy on us steal this stuff and to
give them technology of this kind I
disagree with you haven't just accepted
research mr. president you've set up a
Strategic Defense Initiative and agency
you're beginning to test you're talking
about deploying you're asking for a
budget of some thirty billion dollars
for this purpose this is an arm's
escalation and we will be better off far
better off if we stop right now
because we have more to lose in space
than they do if someday somebody comes
along with an answer that's something
else but that there would be an answer
in our lifetime is unimaginable why do
we start things that we know the Soviets
will match and make us all less secure
that's what a president's more mr.
kondraki your question to mr. Mondale
mr. Mondale you say that with respect to
the Soviet Union you want to negotiate a
mutual nuclear freeze yet you would
unilaterally give up the MX missile and
the b-1 bomber before the talks have
even begun and you have announced in
advance
reaching an agreement with the Soviets
is the most important thing in the world
to you now aren't you giving away half
the store before you even sit down to
talk though as a matter of fact we have
a vast range of Technology and weaponry
right now that provides all the
bargaining chips that we need and I
support the air launched cruise missile
ground-launched cruise missile Pershing
missile the Trident submarine the d5
submarine the stealth technology the
midget man we have a whole range of
technology why I disagree with the MX is
that it's a sitting duck it'll draw an
attack it puts a hair-trigger
and it is a dangerous destabilizing
weapon and the b1 is similarly to be
opposed because for 15 years the Soviet
Union has been preparing to meet the b1
the Secretary of Defense himself said it
would be a suicide mission therefore
were built instead I want to build the
midget man which is mobile and thus less
vulnerable contributing to stability and
a weapon that will give us security and
contribute to an incentive for arms
control that's why I'm for stealth
technology to build a stealth bomber
which I've supported for years that can
penetrate the Soviet air defense system
without any hope that they can perceive
where it is because their radar system
is frustrated in other words a president
has to make choices this makes it
stronger the final point is that we can
use this money that we save on these
weapons to spend on things that we
really need our conventional strength in
Europe is under strength we need to
strengthen that in order to assure our
Western allies of our presence there a
strong defence but also to diminish and
reduce the likelihood of a commencement
of a war and the use of nuclear weapons
it's in this way by making wise choices
that we're stronger we enhance the
chances of arms control every president
till this one has been able to do it and
this nation or the world is more
dangerous as a result I want to I want
to
follow up on mr. Calus question it seems
to me on the question of verifiability
that that you do have some problems with
with the extent of the freeze it seems
to me for example that testing would be
very difficult to verify because the
Soviets encode their telemetry research
would be impossible to verify numbers of
warheads would be impossible to to
verify by satellite except with on-site
inspection and production of any weapon
would be impossible to verify now in
view of that what what is going to be
frozen I will not agree to any arms
control agreement including a freeze
that's not verifiable let's take your
warhead principle the warhead principle
they've been counting rules for years
whenever a weapon is tested we count the
number of warheads on it and whenever
that warhead is used we count that
number of warheads whether they have
that number or less on it or not these
are standard rules I will not agree to
any production restrictions or agreement
where unless we have the ability to
verify those agreements I don't trust
the Russians I believe that every
agreement we reach must be verifiable
and I will not agree to anything that we
cannot tell everyday in other words we
got to be tough but in order to stop
this arms madness we've got to push
ahead with tough negotiations that are
verifiable so that we know the Soviets
are agreeing and living up to their
agreement mr. president I want to ask
you a question about negotiating with
with friends you severely criticized
President Carter for helping to
undermine two friendly dictators who got
into trouble with their own people the
Shah of Iran and president Somoza of
Nicaragua now there are other such
leaders heading for trouble including
president Pinochet of Chile and
President Marcos of the Philippines what
should you do and what can you do to
prevent the Philippines from becoming
another Nicaragua Morton I did criticize
the president because of our
undercutting of what was a stalwart ally
the Shah of Iran and I am not at all
convinced that he was that far out of
line with his people or that they wanted
that to happen the Shah had done our
bidding
and carried our load in the Middle East
for quite some time and I did think that
it was a blot on our record that we let
him down have things gotten better the
Shah whatever he might have done was
building low-cost housing had taken land
away from the mullahs and was
distributing it to the peasants so they
could be landowners things of that kind
but we turned it over to a maniacal
fanatic who has slaughtered thousands
and thousands of people calling it
executions the matter of Somoza no I
never defended Somoza and as a matter of
fact the previous administration stood
by and so did I not that I could have
done anything in my position at that
time but for this revolution to take
place and the promise of the revolution
was democracy human rights free labor
unions Free Press and then just as
Castro had done in Cuba the Sandinistas
rousted the other parties to the
revolution many of them are now the
Contras they exiled some the jails some
they murdered some and they installed a
Marxist Leninist totalitarian government
and what I have to say about this is
many times and this has to do with the
Philippines also I know there are things
there in the Philippines that do not
look good to us from the standpoint
right now of of democratic rights but
what is the alternative it is a large
communist movement to take over the
Philippines they have been our friend
for since their inception as a nation
and I think that we've had enough of a
record of letting under the guise of
revolution someone that we thought was a
little more right than we would be
letting that person go and then winding
up with totalitarianism pure and simple
as the alternative and I think that
we're better off for example with the
Philippines of trying to retain our
friendship and help them right the
wrongs we see rather than throwing them
the wolves and then facing a communist
power in the
civic mr. president since the United
States has to strategically important
bases in the Philippines would the
overthrow of President Marcos constitute
a threat to vital American interests and
if so what would you do about it well as
I say we have to look at what an
overthrow there would mean and what the
government would be that would follow
and there is every evidence every
indication that that government would be
hostile to the United States and that
would be a severe blow to the to our
abilities there in the Pacific and what
would you do about it sorry sorry you've
asked the follow-up question mr. Mondale
your rebuttal
perhaps in no area do we disagree more
than this administration's policies on
human rights
I went to the Philippines as vice
president pressed for Human Rights
called for the release of Aquino and
made progress that had been stalled on
both the Subic and the Clarke airfield
bases what explains this administration
cozying up the Argentine dictators after
they took over fortunately a democracy
took over but this nation was
embarrassed by this occurred
administration's adoption of their
policies what happens in South Africa
were for example the Nobel Prize winner
two days ago said this administration is
seen as working with the oppressive
government of that region of South
Africa that hurts this nation we need to
stand for human rights we need to make
it clear we're for human liberty
national security and human rights must
go together but this administration time
and time again has lost its way in this
field President Reagan your rebuttal
well the invasion of Afghanistan didn't
take place on our watch I have described
what has happened in Iran and we weren't
here then either I don't think that our
record of human rights can be assailed I
think that we have observed ourselves
and have done our best to see that human
rights are extended throughout the world
mr. Mondale has recently announced a
plan of here
to get the democracies together and to
work with the whole world to turn to
democracy and I was glad to hear him say
that because that's what we've been
doing ever since I announced to the
British Parliament that I thought we
should do this and human rights are not
advanced when at the same time you then
stand back and say whoops we didn't know
the gun was loaded and you have another
totalitarian power on your hands in this
in this segment because of the pressure
of time there will be no rebuttals and
there will be no follow-up questions was
too true it your question to President
Reagan one question to each candidate
one question to each candidate mr.
president could I take you back to
something you said earlier and if I miss
quoting you please correct me but I
understood you to say that if the
development of space military technology
was successful you might give the
Soviets a demonstration and say here it
is which sounds to me as if you might be
trying to gain the sort of advantage
that would enable you to dictate terms
in which I would then suggest to you
might mean scrapping a generation of
nuclear strategy called mutual
deterrence in which we in effect hold
each other hostage is that your
intention well I can't say that I have
Roundtable that and set down with the
Chiefs of Staff but I have said that it
seems to me that this could be a logical
step in what is my ultimate goal my
ultimate dream and that is the
elimination of nuclear weapons in the
world and it seems to me that this could
be an adjunct or certainly a great
assisting agent in getting that done I
am NOT going to roll over as mr. Mondale
suggests and give them something that
could turn around and be used against us
but I think it's a very interesting
proposal to see if we can find first of
all something that renders those weapons
obsolete incapable of their their
mission but mr. Mondale seems to approve
mad mad is mutual assured destruction
meaning if you use nuclear weapons on us
the only thing we have to keep you from
doing it is that we'll kill as many
people to viewers as you will kill of
ours I think that to do everything we
can
and as I say something that would
destroy weapons and not humans is a
great step forward in human rights mr.
Mondale could I ask you to address the
question of nuclear strategy then let's
the formal doctrine is very arcane but
I'm going to ask you to deal with it
anyway do you believe in in mad mutual
assured destruction mutual deterrence as
it has been practiced for the last
generation I believe in a sensible arms
control approach that brings down these
weapons to manageable levels I would
like to see their elimination and in the
meantime we have to be strong enough to
make certain that the Soviet Union never
attempts to us now here we have to
decide between generalized objectives
and reality the president says he wants
to eliminate or reduce the number of
nuclear weapons but in fact these last
four years have seen more weapons built
a wider and more vigorous arms race in a
human history he says he wants a system
that will make nuclear arms wars safe so
nobody's going to get hurt well maybe
someday somebody can dream of that but
why start an arms race now why
destabilize our relationship
why threaten our space satellites upon
wheat which we defend why pursue a
strategy that would delegate compute to
computers the question of starting a war
a president to defend this country and
to get arms control must master what's
going on we all I accept his objective
and his dreams we all do but the hard
reality is that we must know what we're
doing and pursue those objectives that
are possible in our time he's opposed
every effort of every president do so
and the four years of his administration
he's a fail to do so and if you want a
tough president who uses that strength
to get arms control and draws the line
in the heavens vote for Walter Mondale
please I'm not I must again ask the
audience not to applaud not to cheer not
to demonstrate its feelings in any way
we've arrived at the point in the debate
now where we call for closing statements
you have the full four minutes each of
you mr. Mondale will you go first
I want to thank the legal of adverse the
good citizens of Kansas City the
President Reagan for agreeing to debate
this evening this evening we talked
about national strength I believe we
need to be strong and I will keep a
strong but eye straight I think strength
must also require wisdom and smarts in
its exercise that's key to the strength
of our nation a president must know the
essential facts essential to command but
a president must also have a vision of
where this nation should go tonight as
Americans you have a choice and you're
entitled to know where we would take
this country if you decide to elect us
as president I would press for long term
vigorous economic growth that's why I
want to get these debts down and these
interest rates down restore America's
exports help rural America which is
suffering so much and bring the jobs
back here for our children
I want this next generation to be the
best educated in American history to
invest in the human mind and science
again so we're out front
I want this nation to protect its air
its water its land and it's public
health America is not temporary we're
forever and as Americans our generation
should protect this wonderful land for
our children I want a nation of fairness
where no one is denied the fullness of
life or discriminated against and we
deal compassionately with those in our
midst or in trouble and above all I want
a nation that's strong since we debated
two weeks ago
the United States and the Soviet Union
have built a hundred more warheads
enough to kill millions of Americans and
millions of Soviet citizens
this doesn't strengthen us this weakens
the chances of civilization to survive I
remember the night before I became
vice-president I was given the briefing
and told that anytime night or day I
might be called upon to make the
Masonville most fateful decision on
earth whether to fire these atomic
weapons that could destroy the human
species that lesson tells us two things
one pick a present that you know we'll
know if that tragic moment ever comes
what he must know because there'll be no
time for staffing committees or advisors
a present must know right then
but above all pick a present who will
fight to avoid the day when that
god-awful decision ever needs to be made
and that's why this election is so
terribly important America and Americans
decide not just what's happening in this
country we are the strongest and most
powerful free society on earth when you
make that judgment you were deciding not
only the future of our nation and a very
profound respect you're providing the
future deciding the future of the world
we need to move on it's time for America
to find new leadership please join me in
this cause to moose move competently and
with a sense of assurance and command to
build the blessed future of our nation
[Music]
president reagan your summation please
yes my thanks to the League of Women
Voters to the panelists the moderator
and to the people of Kansas City for
their warm hospitality and greeting I
think the American people tonight have
much to be grateful for an economic
recovery that has become expansion
freedom and most of all we are at peace
I am grateful for the chance to reaffirm
my commitment to reduce nuclear weapons
and one day to eliminate them entirely
the question before you comes down to
this do you want to see America return
to the policies of weakness of the last
four years or do we want to go forward
marching together as a nation of
strength and that's going to continue to
be strong the we shouldn't be dwelling
on the past or even the present the
meaning of this election is the future
and whether we're going to grow and
provide the jobs and the opportunities
for all Americans and that they need
several years ago I was given an
assignment to write a letter it was to
go into a time capsule and would be read
in a hundred years when that time
capsule was opened I remember driving
down the California coast
one day my mind was full of what I was
going to put in that letter about the
problems and the issues that confront us
in our time and what we did about them
but I couldn't completely neglect the
beauty around me the Pacific out there
in one side of the highway shining in
the Sun like the mountains of the coast
range rising on the other side and I
found myself wondering what it would be
like for someone wondering if someone a
hundred years from now I'd be driving
down that Highway and if they would see
the same thing and with that thought I
realized what a job I had with that
letter I would be writing a letter to
people who know
everything there is to know about us we
know nothing about them they would know
all about our problems they would know
how we solve them and whether our
solution was beneficial to them down
through the years or whether it hurt
them they would also know that we lived
in a world with terrible weapons nuclear
weapons of terrible destructive power
aimed at each other
capable of crossing the ocean in a
matter of minutes and destroying
civilization as we know it and then I
thought to myself what what are they
going to say about us what are those
people 200 years from now going to think
they will know whether we use those
weapons or not well what they will say
about us a hundred years from now
depends on how we keep our rendezvous
with destiny will we do the things that
we know must be done and know that one
day down in history hundred years or
perhaps before someone will say thank
God for those people back in the 1980s
for preserving our freedom for saving
for us this blessed planet called Earth
with all its grandeur and its beauty you
know I am grateful to all of you for
giving me the opportunity to serve you
for these four years and I seek
re-election because I want more than
anything else to try to complete the new
beginning that we charted four years ago
George Bush who I think is one of the
finest vice presidents this country has
ever had George Bush and I have
crisscrossed the country and we've had
in these last few months a wonderful
experience we have met young America we
have met your sons and daughters mr.
president I am obliged to cut you off
there under the rules of the debate I'm
sorry all right I was just wondering
[Music]
perhaps perhaps I should point out that
the rules under which I did that we're
agreed upon by the tea campaigns with
the land as you notice Thank You mr.
president Thank You mr. Mondale I thanks
also to the panel finally to our
audience we thank you and the League of
Women Voters asks me to say to you don't
forget to vote on November 6th
[Music]
you